.. _minimal_sets:

Truncation into minimal basis sets
==================================

Minimal basis sets of atomic orbitals are useful for many purposes,
such as to formulate atomic population analyses, obtain decent initial
guesses for hard self-consistent field calculations, or reducing the
orbital space in a multiconfigurational calculation.

However, there is no one true "minimal basis set", even though STO-3G
or STO-6G are often used for this purpose. The minimality of the basis
only refers to the number of basis functions - for instance, for
oxygen the minimal basis is 2s1p - but it does not specify how well
these orbitals are themselves described.

For simplicity, we will demonstrate this for a Hartree-Fock
calculation on the neon atom, where symmetry breaking is not an issue.
We will consider the STO-3G and STO-6G basis sets, as well as minimal
basis sets extracted from the Dunning cc-pVnZ sets, which can be
compared to fully numerical reference values (Lehtola,
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.012516). ::

  Basis             Energy (Eh)  Error (Eh)
  STO-3G          -126.60452509     1.9e+00
  STO-6G          -127.77673830     7.7e-01
  cc-pVDZ         -128.48877555     5.8e-02
  cc-pVTZ         -128.53186164     1.5e-02
  cc-pVQZ         -128.54346966     3.6e-03
  cc-pV5Z         -128.54677013     3.3e-04
  cc-pV6Z         -128.54706110     3.7e-05

  fully numerical -128.54709811


As is immediately clear from the table, STO-3G and STO-6G are quite
inaccurate by modern standards, with errors in the absolute energy of
around a hartree, but the error for the gas-phase atom goes down when
a larger primitive expansion is used.

It is especially important to note that the minimal basis set depends
on the Hamiltonian: if you employ a relativistic approximation or an
effective core potential and you intend to use a minimal basis set to
initialize a larger calculation, make sure first that the two
approaches correspond to the same Hamiltonian.

Minimal basis sets can be generated by the removal of the free
primitives in the basis set; this is implemented in the
:func:`basis_set_exchange.manip.remove_free_primitives` function.
Note that contracted polarization functions (e.g. in the atomic
natural orbital, ANO, basis sets, or the correlation consistent sets
for transition metals) will not be removed by the function, so be sure
to check whether the result is what you want.
